# Finite fields

Lurk proofs are implemented in arithmetic circuits whose fundamental numeric type is the finite field.
This is because zk-SNARKs use elliptic curves for their cryptographic properties.
In practice, this means that arithmetic is performed modulo some large prime (the *order* of the field).

Lurk’s primary target is the [Nova](https://github.com/microsoft/Nova) proving system, which is a recursive SNARK.
This requires a [curve cycle](https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/595.pdf), and by default we use the [Pasta curves](https://electriccoin.co/blog/the-pasta-curves-for-halo-2-and-beyond/).
What this means for programmers, is that Lurk’s default numbers are elements of `Fq`, the [scalar field of Pallas](https://github.com/zcash/pasta_curves/blob/main/src/fields/fq.rs).

```
user> (- 0 1)
[3 iterations] => 0x40000000000000000000000000000000224698fc0994a8dd8c46eb2100000000
```

The result, `0x40000000000000000000000000000000224698fc0994a8dd8c46eb2100000000`, is the largest value representable in `Fq`.
That is to say, it is one less than `q`, the [modulus of `Fq`](https://github.com/zcash/pasta_curves/blob/main/src/fields/fq.rs#L21).

```
user> (+ 0x40000000000000000000000000000000224698fc0994a8dd8c46eb2100000000 1)
[3 iterations] => 0
```

Division works in a finite field,

```
user> (/ 10 2)
[3 iterations] => 5
```

but the results are not intuitive if the dividend is not a multiple of the divisor.

```
user> (/ 5 6)
[3 iterations] => 0x0aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaab061197f56ee1c24ecb67c8580000001
```

However, since division is implemented as the product with the multiplicative inverse, arithmetic manipulation works as expected, which is the point.

```
user> (* (/ 5 6) 6)
[6 iterations] => 5
```

You can use fractional notation as syntax sugar.
The arithmetic operation happens at parse time and Lurk's CEK machine just needs to handle a self-evaluating number.

```
user> 5/6
[1 iteration] => 0x0aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaab061197f56ee1c24ecb67c8580000001
```

The same result as a sum.

```
user> (+ 1/3 1/2)
[3 iterations] => 0x0aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaab061197f56ee1c24ecb67c8580000001
user> (= (+ 1/3 1/2) 5/6)
[6 iterations] => t
```

## Ordering

Lurk defines an ordering of field elements, but take note that since finite-field arithmetic is modular, there must be a counter-intuitive case.

```
user> 
(let ((largest-unsigned (- 0 1))
      (most-positive (/ largest-unsigned 2))
      (most-negative (+ 1 most-positive)))
  (< most-negative most-positive))
[21 iterations] => t
```
Above, the most-negative number is produced by adding one to the most-positive.
If we imagine the elements of the finite field on a line, it would look like this:

```
|-------------------------||--------------------------|
0            most-positive┘└most-negative      largest-unsigned
```

So the seemingly large number `largest-unsigned` actually compares as *less than zero*.

```
user> (< 0x40000000000000000000000000000000224698fc0994a8dd8c46eb2100000000 0)
[3 iterations] => t
```

And similarly to the fractional notation, Lurk provides a negative-number syntax.

```
user> -1
[1 iteration] => 0x40000000000000000000000000000000224698fc0994a8dd8c46eb2100000000
```

Using extended numeric syntax, it’s easy to remember how to express the most negative and most positive field elements.

```
user> 
(let ((most-positive -1/2)
      (most-negative 1/2))
  (= most-negative (+ 1 most-positive)))
[13 iterations] => t
```

> -1/2 + 1 = 1/2

Although Lurk’s field-element ordering allows for sorting and comprehensible comparisons between "small" (i.e. less than `most-positive`) field elements, elements derived from operations which overflow will violate expectations.
This follows from the fact that finite fields are not [ordered fields](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordered_field).
Nevertheless, when an application knows the domain of its operations is restricted to "small" field elements, or when an opaque consistent ordering is required, Lurk’s native comparisons can be useful.

But please note that use of fractional syntax does not yield "real" fractions.
The resulting field elements do not always compare as expected.

```
user> (< 3/4 7/8)
[3 iterations] => nil
```

## Unsigned integers

Although encoded with finite field elements, unsigned integers are supported by Lurk out of the box.

```
user> 3u64
[1 iteration] => 3u64
```

And they exhibit the roundtripping properties we'd expect.

```
[1 iteration] => 18446744073709551615u64
user> (- 0u64 1u64)
[3 iterations] => 18446744073709551615u64
user> (+ 18446744073709551615u64 1u64)
[3 iterations] => 0u64
```

Unsigned integers also enable a well-behaved modulus operation.

```
user> (% 8u64 3u64)
[3 iterations] => 2u64
```
